---
title: Young Tech Man Starts Blog
tags:
mathjax: false
author: Steven Chun
date: 2020-02-25 23:15:50
summary: Look, I don't know. It seemed like a good idea at the time.
twitter_image: https://imgur.com/a/lSruREG
---

I know what this looks like. And you’re not entirely wrong, either.


Yes, I—a young, recent college graduate living in San Francisco and working
in the technology industry—have decided to start a blog. Being an occasional
consumer of blogs much like this, I’m fully aware that this is the second
most common and least differentiable sort of writing, right behind healthy
eating recipes. But, Dear Reader, this blog isn’t really for you. This blog
is for me. I thought the reasons why that’s true might make for a good first
blog post.


**Here’s the main one**:

I want to learn things. But it’s easy to try to learn things and still be dumb
about them. But if I’m dumb about them in a blog post, on the internet, which is
public, I will be embarrassed and probably bullied. So, this will make me work
very hard to not be dumb in my blog posts, which will make me smart.

**But there’s also this**:

I miss writing and have become bad at it. I need literary exercise[^1].

Let’s start with that.


## Writing

I’ve always thought of myself as a “writer”. This distressing condition can
probably be traced back to an excellent high school writing teacher, Mr.
Friebel, and to four years of writing really mediocre opinion articles for The
Dartmouth. Any brief attempt to write seriously will simply leave one with the
crushing realization that writing is very hard and those who do it well[^2] are
mysterious and frightening[^3]. But every now and then, you write something
you’re proud of and it’s a joy.

So, I wish to write[^4]. Studying computer science and economics didn’t offer
many opportunities to write creatively. Right now, my writing is ungreat.
Hopefully, by writing publically and prolifically, my writing becomes gooder.


## Explaining

Blog posts can do wonders for a hard topic. There’s Chris Colah’s _[Visual
Information Theory](https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-09-Visual-Information/)_,
which is quickly becoming legend. There’s the completely insane world of
[Gwern](https://www.gwern.net/), who is already a sort of myth[^5]. And there’s
[Money
Stuff](http://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/join/4wm/moneystuff-signup&hash=54223001ca3ffcf40f2629c25acea67a),
which is not a blog post but a daily newsletter which is sort of the same thing,
by [Bloomberg’s Matt
Levine](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/authors/ARbTQlRLRjE/matthew-s-levine),
which is easily what I look forward to most when I wake up[^6]. These are all
writers who, though they write to different ends, are good at explaining hard
things. This is something I’d like to learn.

Of course, the aforementioned writers all possess specialized knowledge—a deep
knowledge of neural networks, a JD and a few years of investment banking, or
being a totally anonymous, self-experimenting mysterious internet person—that I
lack. Which is why “blog” isn’t my favorite word to describe this site. I’m not
sharing my domain knowledge, I’m documenting my attempt to acquire it. It’s
basically a bunch of notes to myself. It’d be great if those notes explained
things well.


## Learning & Remembering

Writing is great and all, but back to the matter of being less dumb. There are
many technical matters I’d like to assay[^7]. The problem is my ability to
seriously learn suffers outside of rigid academic structures. I also have a very
poor memory. I need a way to force myself to really work with a problem so that
I actually understand it. Once I’ve understood it, I need to remember it.

Here’s [Gregory
Gundersen](http://gregorygundersen.com/blog/2020/01/12/why-research-blog/), a
PhD at Princeton and random[^8] internet person who is smarter than me but
roughly doing the same thing:

“Blogging is a public act. Anyone can read this. When I write a blog post, I
imagine my supervisor, a respected colleague, or a future employer reading my
explanation. These imagined readers force me to ask myself honestly if I
understand what I am writing. How do I know when a post is done? I write until I
stop having significant questions, until my imaginary audience stop raising
their hands. The end result is that writing forces me to acknowledge and then
work through my confusion.”

Bingo.

When it comes to remembering, I think narrative structures are great. Stories
stick to my brain in ways facts don’t. “Some smart people decided that picking
stocks is really hard and doesn’t always make money. So, they decided to just
buy a little bit of all the stocks (basically) because in general the U.S.
economy grows so on average they’ll make money in a much more predictable way.”
That’s an index fund! And it’s easy to add other characters, stockholders,
government regulators, and the like. It’s possible that someone has already
written the perfect, narrative explanation for me for every topic I want to
learn about. That seems unlikely and also runs afoul of the “learn by
explaining” goal of this blog.

So, it seems useful to write explanations _for_ myself, in a way that I find
tractable, in a place where I can reference them once I’ve inevitably forgotten
them. Again, basically a bunch of notes to myself.

Here’s crazy ‘ol [Gwern again](https://www.gwern.net/About):

“Rather, I am attempting to explain things to my future self, who is intelligent
and interested, but has forgotten. What I am doing is explaining why I decided
what I did to myself and noting down everything I found interesting about it for
future reference. I hope my other readers, whomever they may be, might find the
topic as interesting as I found it, and the essay useful or at least
entertaining–but the intended audience is my future self.”

So, Dear Reader, while I hope that you find my work here educational or at least
entertaining, it is chiefly my attempt to maintain a vivid intellectual life
(read: less dumb). There may come a point where I will put forth novel ideas,
but that point is probably quite far off. It is likely that in writing to
understand, I’ll mostly just point out how much I don’t know, despite my fancy
degree and fancy job. This will probably be embarrassing. It might be fun! Who
knows.


<!-- Footnotes themselves at the bottom. --> ## Notes

[^1]: This includes reading regularly for the first time since, I don’t know,
  elementary school summers?

[^2]: I can’t get enough of stories about famous writers, particularly the
  slightly unsettled, hypermasculine creative nonfiction types. One great one is
  [this 1960 New Yorker
  story](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1960/10/08/massachusetts-vs-mailer)
  where Norman Mailer, vacationing in Cape Cod, ends up being arrested for
  calling “Taxi!” after a passing police wagon. A fight ensues. Mailer
  condescends, “At one point one of the policemen tripped and fell, but I was on
  my feet all the way, a point to take no vast pride in because the cops were
  smaller than me, and did not know how to fight.” He then represents himself in
  court, swearing in his wife and _the journalist from the New Yorker_ as
  witnesses. He wins. Despite being, at one point, a finalist for a prize named
  after Mailer, I do not know how to fight.

[^3]: Also, [Hunter S. Thompson’s
  schedule](https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/news/hunter-s-thompson-s-daily-routine-was-the-height-of-dissolution-a6798801.html).
  It’s worth noting that while I find these writers fascinating, I have no
  illusions that they were also sometimes violent, chauvinistic, and all in all
  deeply unwell.

[^4]: But I don’t really wish to edit. Which is bad because editing is a
  fundamental part of good writing. I still haven’t decided how much I’m going
  to edit these things. I’ll probably rework sections as I go (which makes my
  intros heavily edited and makes my conclusions basically improv). I’ll
  probably also send my stuff to a smart friend or two for an accuracy/sanity
  check.

[^5]: And whose use of Edward Tufte-esque type and sidenotes I liked quite a bit
  and copied for this blog.

[^6]: What? It’s fun.

[^7]: Because I’ll _assay_ (from the French “to try, _essayer_ ”) to understand
  something and then write an _essay_ about it, eh? I am not fun at parties.

[^8]: I think I found this on HackerNews, where I find a lot of things.
